#summary Download links

= Available downloads =


<wiki:toc max_depth="4" />

== Biodiverse GUI ==

  === 0.99_007 (development release)===

  _This is the current development version, leading towards a version 1.0 release._

  The [https://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/wiki/ReleaseNotes#Version_0.99_007 release notes] summarise the changes in this version.  
  There is also a series of blog posts at http://biodiverse-analysis-software.blogspot.com.au/

  * Windows (64 bit).  Download, unzip and then run the Biodiverse executable file.
    * [http://biodiverse.unsw.edu.au/downloads/biodiverse_0.99_007_win64.7z 7zip format]. File size is 27 MB.  (The 7zip utility can be downloaded from http://www.7-zip.org).
    * [http://biodiverse.unsw.edu.au/downloads/biodiverse_0.99_007_win64.zip zip format]. File size is 41 MB.  


  * [http://biodiverse.unsw.edu.au/downloads/biodiverse_0.99_007_linux64.tar.gz Linux (64 bit)].  Download, unzip, and then run the Biodiverse binary.  You might need to follow some of the [https://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/wiki/InstallationLinuxBinary installation instructions].

  * [http://biodiverse.unsw.edu.au/downloads/biodiverse_0.99_007_source.7z Source code].  For Mac users.  See the [https://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/wiki/InstallationMacSource installation instructions].

  * [http://biodiverse.unsw.edu.au/downloads/biodiverse_0.99_004_example_data.7z Example data]

  ==== Known issues ====

  * There appear to be problems with the cp936 locale, and probably other CJK character set locales.  The workaround for now is to set your locale and region to US (see details in Issue 506).

  * See also the [https://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/issues/list?can=2&q=Milestone%3DRelease1.0+&colspec=ID+Type+Status+Priority+Milestone+Owner+Summary&cells=tiles open issue list for the 1.0 development series].

  === 0.19 (stable release) ===

  _This is the current stable release._

  The [https://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/wiki/ReleaseNotes#Version_0.19 release notes] summarise the changes in this version.


  * [http://dl.bintray.com/shawnlaffan/Biodiverse/biodiverse_0.19_win_x64.7z Windows (64 bit, 7zip format, ~22.5MB)]  (The 7zip utility can be downloaded from http://www.7-zip.org).

  * [http://biodiverse.unsw.edu.au/downloads/biodiverse_0.19_win_x64.zip Windows (64 bit, standard zip format, ~45MB)]  

  * [http://dl.bintray.com/shawnlaffan/Biodiverse/biodiverse_0.19_win_x32.7z Windows (32 bit)]

  * [http://dl.bintray.com/shawnlaffan/Biodiverse/biodiverse_0.19_linux_x64.tar.gz Linux (64 bit)]

  * [http://dl.bintray.com/shawnlaffan/Biodiverse/biodiverse_0.19_linux_x32.tar.gz Linux (32 bit)]

  ====Known issues====

  * There appear to be problems with the cp936 locale, and probably other CJK character set locales.  The workaround for now is to set your locale and region to US (see details in Issue 506).


  ===Quick Start Guide===

  A [http://biodiverse.unsw.edu.au/downloads/Biodiverse_Quick_Start_Guide_0.19.pdf quick start guide] for version 0.19 is also available. 


== Site Pair Sampler ==

  [https://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/downloads/detail?name=site_pair_sample_64bit.7z Site pair sampler for GDM analyses].

  For further details, see:

  Rosauer, D.F., Ferrier, S., Williams, K.J., Manion, G, Keogh, S & Laffan, S.W. (2014), Phylogenetic Generalised Dissimilarity Modelling: a new approach to analysing and predicting spatial turnover in the phylogenetic composition of communities. Ecography.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0587.2013.00466.x


== Utility scripts ==

  * [https://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/downloads/detail?name=multidirectional_turnover_analyser.pl Multidirectional Turnover Analyser Perl Script].  Requires a [Installation source code installation].


== Older versions ==

  * Older versions can be accessed via the original [https://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/downloads/list Downloads] page (v0.19 and earlier) or the [http://biodiverse.unsw.edu.au/downloads/deprecated/ deprecated downloads URL].