#summary Windows source code install instructions
#sidebar Installation

These instructions apply to version 0.18 *AND ARE EXPERIMENTAL*.  

These assume you have saved the Biodiverse source code to C:\biodiverse.  If you have not then change the `C:\biodiverse\lib` path in the following to the appropriate path.

_IMPORTANT_:  You need to be sure to run step 4 from the installation every time you want to run the system.  (This is until we develop a batch script to handle it).  

_DO NOT USE A PATH WITH SPACES IN IT_.  This causes problems with the batch file used to run the source code version.  (This has no effect on the executable file).


<wiki:toc max_depth="4" />


= !StrawberryPerl = 


== Installation (64bit) ==


1.  Install Strawberry Perl 5.16, 64 bit.  The rest of these instructions assume you have used C:\strawberry as the install folder.  If you have not then edit the paths below to match what you have used.

2.  Download the source code version to obtain a stable release.  Alternately you can run an svn update to get the latest Biodiverse code (if you are using svn).

3.  Open a command prompt.  The rest of these instructions assume you are at the prompt.

4.  Run these commands, editing the folder paths as needed to match your system.

{{{
  set BDV_PATH=c:\biodiverse
  set STRAWPATH=c:\strawberry
  set GTK_PATH=c:\gtk_win64
  set PATH=%GTK_PATH%\c\bin;%STRAWPATH%\bin;%STRAWPATH%\perl\site\bin;%STRAWPATH%\perl\vendor\bin;%STRAWPATH%\perl\bin;%PATH%
}}}

5.  Download the gtk_win64 components using an svn checkout. TortoiseSVN is the easiest way, but this command line will work if you installed the shell options with TortoiseSVN (or you have a different svn client).

{{{
  svn co https://biodiverse.googlecode.com/svn/branches/gtk_win_builds/etc/gtk_win64 %GTK_PATH%
}}}


6.  Now we need to install some files using PPM and then cpan.  In the same command prompt that you ran the commands from step 1, run the ppm install command for all ppd files:

{{{
  set BDV_PPM=https://biodiverse.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/etc/ppm/ppm516_x64
  ppm install %BDV_PPM%/Cairo.ppd 
  ppm install %BDV_PPM%/Glib.ppd 
  ppm install %BDV_PPM%/Gnome2-Canvas.ppd 
  ppm install %BDV_PPM%/Gtk2-GladeXML.ppd 
  ppm install %BDV_PPM%/Gtk2.ppd 
  ppm install %BDV_PPM%/Pango.ppd

  cpan rlib
  cpan autovivification
  cpan Task::Biodiverse::NoGUI
  cpan Task::Biodiverse
}}}


== Running it (64bit) ==

The above installation process *should* install all the relevant files, so we can now run it.  

1.  This is the same as step 1 in the installation instructions, but needs to be run every time you open a new command prompt (unless you add the paths to your PATH variable at the windows level).  Remember to edit the folder paths if you installed Biodiverse, the Gtk libs and/or Strawberry Perl to different folders.  

{{{
  set BDV_PATH=c:\biodiverse
  set STRAWPATH=c:\strawberry
  set GTK_PATH=c:\gtk_win64
  set PATH=%GTK_PATH%\c\bin;%STRAWPATH%\bin;%STRAWPATH%\perl\site\bin;%STRAWPATH%\perl\vendor\bin;%STRAWPATH%\perl\bin;%PATH%
}}}

2.  Now you can run it.  

{{{
  perl %BDV_PATH%\bin\BiodiverseGUI.pl
}}}


  *  See the [#Trouble_shooting trouble shooting] section below if you encounter problems.  


= Trouble shooting =

  * If you get errors about not finding gnome-canvas, glib and friends then check that the `%GTK_PATH%\c\bin` directory exists and is correctly named.
  *  If Perl complains that it cannot locate a file when running Biodiverse then this library will need to be installed interactively using cpan. The complaint will contain text like `Can't locate Fred/Fred.pm in @INC (@INC contains:...)`  In this case, install module Fred::Fred (substitute a double colon "::" for each forward slash "/", and remove the trailing ".pm" from the module it cannot locate). E.g.: `cpan Fred::Fred` . This can happen if one or more of the modules listed in the bundle failed to install.

  *  Please report any other issues using the [http://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/issues/list project issue tracker]
  