#summary Windows binary executable install instructions
#sidebar Installation

These instructions apply to version 0.14 and later.

*Note that this executable will not work on Windows 2000 and earlier.*

= Installation =

  *  These instructions assume you have [http://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/downloads/list downloaded] and extracted the Biodiverse zip file to your hard drive.  
  *  The following assumes you have unzipped it to `C:\biodiverse`.  If you use a different path then modify the commands below as appropriate.

= Running it =

  *  Biodiverse can be run by double clicking on `C:\biodiverse\BiodiverseGUI_win.exe`.
  *  If you want to keep the command log visible after you close Biodiverse then run it from a command prompt.
    *  Under `Start Menu -> Run` type `cmd`.  
    *  In the resulting command window, type `C:\biodiverse\BiodiverseGUI_win.exe`.


= Troubleshooting and changes =

  *  If you don't like the window theme it uses then you can change them using the GTK+ Preference Tool from http://gtk-win.sourceforge.net/home/index.php/Gtk2Prefs

  *  The Windows executable is generated using the !ActiveState !PerlApp tool.  It will work provided you do not move or rename the Gtk folder.  If you do, then make sure a Gtk\bin folder is in your system path so it finds the appropriate binaries that it depends on.  This folder needs to also include the libgnomecanvas.dll file that comes with Biodiverse.

  *  Please report any other issues using the [http://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/issues/list project issue tracker]