#summary Publications describing and using Biodiverse (or its ancestors)
#labels Featured
#sidebar TOC

==Primary citation==
To cite Biodiverse or acknowledge its use, cite this publication as follows, substituting the version of the application that you used for "Version 0.19".
  *  Laffan, S.W., Lubarsky, E. & Rosauer, D.F. (2010) Biodiverse, a tool for the spatial analysis of biological and related diversity.  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0587.2010.06237.x Ecography. Vol 33, 643-647 (version 0.19)].   {Article access is free from the publisher}

  (An alternate link is http://handle.unsw.edu.au/1959.4/45539 ).


==Publications using Biodiverse (or its ancestors)==
  (Publications are listed in reverse chronological order by year, then by author within years).

  *  Nagalingum, N.S., Knerr, N., Laffan, S., Gonzalez-Orozco, C., Thornhill, A., Miller, J.T. and Mishler, B.D. (in press) Continental scale patterns and predictors of fern richness and phylogenetic diversity. [http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fgene.2015.00132/ Frontiers in Genetics].

  *  Schmidt-Lebuhn, A.N., Knerr, N.J., Miller, J.T and Mishler, B.D. (in press) Phylogenetic diversity and endemism of Australian daisies (Asteraceae).  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jbi.12488 Journal of Biogeography]

  *  Cook, L.G., Hardy, N.B. and Crisp, M.D. (in press) Three explanations for biodiversity hotspots: small range size, geographical overlap and time for species accumulation. An Australian case study.  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/nph.13199 New Phytologist].

  *  Costion, C.M., Edwards, W., Ford, A.J., Metcalfe, D.J., Cross, H.B., Harrington, M.G., Richardson, J.E., Hilbert, D.W., Lowe, A.J. and Crayn, D.M. (in press) Using phylogenetic diversity to identify ancient rain forest refugia and diversification zones in a biodiversity hotspot.  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ddi.12266 Diversity and Distributions].

  *  Daru, B.H., van der Bank, M. and Davies, T.J. (in press) Spatial incongruence among hotspots and complementary areas of tree diversity in southern Africa.  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ddi.12290 Diversity and Distributions].  

  *  Bui, E.N., González-Orozco, C.E. and Miller, J.T. (2014) _Acacia_, climate, and geochemistry in Australia.  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11104-014-2113-x Plant and Soil, 381, 161-175].

  *  Carnaval, A., Waltari, E., Rodrigues, M., Rosauer, D., VanDerWal, J., Damasceno, R., Prates, I., Strangas, M., Spanos, Z., Rivera, D.,Pie, M., Firkowski, C., Bornschein, M., Ribeiro, L. & Moritz, C. (2014) Prediction of phylogeographic endemism in an environmentally complex biome. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2014.1461 Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 281, 20141461].

  *  Di Virgilio, G. & Laffan, S.W. (2014) Using maps of continuous variation in species compositional turnover to supplement uniform polygon species range maps.  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2013.871725 International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 28, 1658-1673].

  *  Di Virgilio, G., Laffan, S.W., Ebach, M.C. & Chapple, D.G. (2014) Spatial variation in the climatic predictors of species compositional turnover and endemism.  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ece3.1156 Ecology and Evolution, 4, 3264–3278].

  *  Fenker, J., Tedeschi, L.G., Pyron, R.A. and Nogueira, C. de C. (2014) Phylogenetic diversity, habitat loss and conservation in South American pitvipers (Crotalinae: _Bothrops_ and _Bothrocophias_).  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ddi.12217 Diversity and Distributions, 20, 1108–1119].

  *  González-Orozco, C.E., Ebach, M.C., Laffan, S.W., Thornhill, A.H., Knerr, N., Schmidt-Lebuhn, A., Cargill, C.C., Clements, M., Nagalingum, N., Mishler, B.D. & Miller, J.T. (2014) Quantifying phytogeographical regions of Australia using geospatial turnover in species composition.  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0092558 PLoS One, 9, e92558].

  *  González-Orozco, C.E., Thornhill, A.H., Knerr, N., Laffan, S.W. & Miller, J.T. (2014) Biogeographical regions and phytogeography of the eucalypts. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ddi.12129 Diversity and Distributions, 20, 46-58].

  *  Kooyman, R.M., Wilf, P., Barreda, V.D., Carpenter, R.J., Jordan, G.J., Sniderman, J.M.K., Allen, A., Brodribb, T.J., Crayn, D., Feild, T.S., Laffan, S.W., Lusk, C., Rossetto, M. & Weston, P. (2014) Paleo-Antarctic Rainforest into the Modern Old World Tropics: the Rich Past and Threatened Future of the "Southern Wet Forest Survivors". [http://10.3732/ajb.1400340 American Journal of Botany, 101, 2121-2135].

  *  Loader, S.P., Ceccarelli, F.S., Menegon, M., Howell, K.M., Kassahun, R., Mengistu, A.A., Saber, S.A., Gebresenbet, F., Sá, R., Davenport, T.R.B., Larson, J.G., Müller, H., Wilkinson, M. and Gower, D.J. (2014) Persistence and stability of Eastern Afromontane forests: evidence from brevicipitid frogs.  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jbi.12331 Journal of Biogeography, 41, 1781–1792].

  *  Mendoza, A.M. and Arita, H.T. (2014) Priority setting by sites and by species using rarity, richness and phylogenetic diversity: the case of neotropical glassfrogs (Anura: Centrolenidae) [http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10531-014-0642-5 Biodiversity and Conservation, 23, 909-926].

  *  Mishler, B.D., Knerr, N., González-Orozco, C.E., Thornhill, A.H., Laffan, S.W. & Miller, J.T. (2014) Phylogenetic measures of biodiversity and neo- and paleo-endemism in Australian _Acacia_. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ncomms5473 Nature Communications, 5, 4473].

  *  Nagalingum, N.S., Knerr, N., Mishler, B.D. and D.C. Cargill (2014) Overlapping fern and bryophyte hotspots: assessing ferns as a predictor of bryophyte diversity. [http://dx.doi.org/10.7751/telopea20148280 Telopea, 17, 383–392].

  *  Perales, H. and Golicher, D. (2014) Mapping the Diversity of Maize Races in Mexico. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0114657 PLoS ONE 9): e114657].

  *  Rosauer, D.F., Ferrier, S., Williams, K.J., Manion, G, Keogh, S & Laffan, S.W. (2014) Phylogenetic Generalised Dissimilarity Modelling: a new approach to analysing and predicting spatial turnover in the phylogenetic composition of communities.  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0587.2013.00466.x Ecography, 37, 21-32].

  *  Weber, L.C., VanDerWal, J., Schmidt, S., McDonald, W.J.F. & Shoo, L.P. (2014) Patterns of rain forest plant endemism in subtropical Australia relate to stable mesic refugia and species dispersal limitations.  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jbi.12219 Journal of Biogeography, 41, 222-238].

  *  Bitencourt, C. & Rapinia, A. (2013) Centres of Endemism in the Espinhaço Range: identifying cradles and museums of Asclepiadoideae (Apocynaceae).  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14772000.2013.865681 Systematics and Biodiversity, 11, 525-536].

  *  Di Virgilio, G., Laffan, S.W. & Ebach, M.C. (2013) Quantifying high resolution transitional breaks in plant and mammal distributions at regional extent and their association with climate, topography and geology.  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0059227 PLoS ONE, 8, e59227].

  *  González-Orozco, C.E., Laffan, S.W., Knerr, N. & Miller, J.T. (2013) A biogeographic regionalisation of Australian _Acacia_ species. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jbi.12153 Journal of Biogeography, 40, 2156-2166].

  *  Kooyman, R.M., Rossetto, M., Sauquet, H. & Laffan, S.W. (2013) Landscape Patterns in Rainforest Phylogenetic Signal: Isolated Islands of Refugia or Structured Continental Distributions?  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0080685 PLoS One 8, e80685]

  *  Laffan, S.W., Ramp, D. & Roger, E. (2013) Using endemism to assess representation of protected areas – the family Myrtaceae in the Greater Blue Mountains World Heritage Area. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jbi.12001 Journal of Biogeography, 40, 570-578].

  *  Amboni, M. & Laffan, S.W. (2012) The effect of species range estimation methods on richness and phylogenetic diversity estimates: A comparison of four methods using Australian marsupials. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2012.717627 International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 26, 2097-2109].

  *  Burley, H.M., Laffan, S.W., & Williams, K.J. (2012) Spatial non-stationarity and anisotropy of compositional turnover in eastern Australian Myrtaceae species. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2012.692371 International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 26, 2065-2081].

  *  Di Virgilio, G., Laffan, S.W. & Ebach, M.C. (2012) Fine scale quantification of floral and faunal breaks and their geographic correlates, with an example from south-eastern Australia. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2699.2012.02739.x Journal of Biogeography, 39, 1862-1876].

  *  González-Orozco, C.E., Brown, A.H.D., Knerr, N., Miller, J.T. & Doyle, J.J. (2012) Hotspots of diversity of wild Australian soybean relatives and their conservation in situ. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10592-012-0370-x Conservation Genetics, 13, 1269-1281].

  *  Ribeiro, P.L., Rapini, A, Silva, U.C.S., Konno, T.U.P., Damascena, L.S & van den Berg, C. (2012) Spatial analyses of the phylogenetic diversity of _Minaria_ (Apocynaceae): assessing priority areas for conservation in the Espinhaço Range, Brazil.  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14772000.2012.705356 Systematics and Biodiversity, 10, 317-331].

  *  Schmidt-Lebuhn, A.N., Knerr, N.J., González-Orozco, C.E. (2012) Distorted perception of the spatial distribution of plant diversity through uneven collecting efforts: the example of Asteraceae in Australia. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2699.2012.02756.x Journal of Biogeography, 39, 2072-2080].

  *  Stevenson, L.A., González-Orozco, C.E., Knerr, N., Cargill, D.C., Miller, J.T. (2012) Species richness and endemism of Australian bryophytes.  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1179/1743282012Y.0000000004 Journal of Bryology, 34, 101-107].

  *  Gonzalez-Orozco, C.E., Laffan, S.W., Miller, J. (2011) Spatial distribution of species richness and endemism of the genus Acacia in Australia. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1071/BT11112 Australian Journal of Botany, 59, 600-608]

  *  Laffan, S.W. (2011) Spatial non-stationarity, anisotropy and scale: The interactive visualisation of spatial turnover. pp. 1652-1658 in Chan, F., Marinova, D. and Anderssen, R.S. (eds) [http://www.mssanz.org.au/modsim2011/E3/laffan.pdf MODSIM2011, 19th International Congress on Modelling and Simulation]. Modelling and Simulation Society of Australia and New Zealand, December 2011. 
  
  *  Rosauer, D.F., Laffan, S.W., Crisp, M.D., Donnellan, S.C. & Cook, L.G. (2009). Phylogenetic endemism: a new approach to identifying geographical concentrations of evolutionary history. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-294X.2009.04311.x Molecular Ecology, 18, 4061-4072]. 

  *  Jones C. &  Laffan S.W. (2008) Lexical similarity and endemism in historical wordlists of Australian Aboriginal languages of the greater Sydney region. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-968X.2008.00209.x Transactions of the Philological Society, 106, 456-486]. 

  *  Bickford, S.A. & Laffan, S.W. (2006) Multi-extent analysis of the relationship between pteridophyte species richness and climate.   [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1466-8238.2006.00250.x Global Ecology and Biogeography, 15, 588-601].

  *  Laffan, S.W. & Bickford, S.A. (2005) Using spatial randomisations to improve the utility of Geographically Weighted Regression model results. In [http://www.mssanz.org.au/modsim05/papers/laffan.pdf MODSIM 2005 International Congress on Modelling and Simulation] (eds R. Argent & A. Zerger), pp. 1396-1401. Modelling and Simulation Society of Australia and New Zealand, Melbourne, Australia.
  
  *  Bickford, S.A., Laffan, S.W., de Kok, R. & Orthia, L. (2004) Spatial analysis of taxonomic and genetic patterns and their potential for understanding evolutionary histories.   [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2699.2004.01127.x Journal of Biogeography, 31, 1715-1733]. 

  *  Laffan, S.W. & Crisp, M.D. (2003) Assessing endemism at multiple spatial scales, with an example from the Australian vascular flora. [http://dx.doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2699.2003.00875.x Journal of Biogeography, 30, 511-520]. 

  *  Crisp, M.D., Laffan, S., Linder, H.P. & Munro, A. (2001) Endemism in the Australian Flora.  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2699.2001.00524.x Journal of Biogeography, 28, 183-198]. 