#summary Release notes will be added as new versions are developed
#labels Featured
#sidebar TOC

= Version 0.15 =

This release is in development.  A summary of changes is below.

To see the full list of changes, see http://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/issues/list?can=1&q=label%3AMilestone-Release0.15

  *  Under the bonnet
    *  Recycling works properly now (issue #127)
  *  Calculations and Indices
    *  The PD node list has been moved to its own calculation (issue #130)
  *  Exporting data
    *  Exporting groups to raster formats now works properly (issue #129)
  *  Importing data
    *  Column numbers are now displayed when importing data (issue #128)



= Version 0.14 =

Main changes since the previous version (0.13) are:

  *  GUI (and general)
    *  The naming errors with saving basedata, tree, and matrix files to the biodiverse native format have been corrected.  (Issue #104)
    *  Reading a tree file from biodiverse format works again.  (Issue #105)
    *  The GUI now recognises R style tables for import (as exported using the write.table() function in R).  (Issue #20)
    *  Tree and matrix objects can be renamed.  (Issue #72)
    *  Users can now describe the selected basedata, tree and matrix.  Results are printed to both a popup and to the log window (from where they can be more easily copied).  (Issue #93)
    *  The parameters sections of the Spatial and Cluster tabs can be hidden to free up real estate when selecting calculations to run.  Click on the Parameters button at the top left of the tab to apply it.  (Issue #68)
    *  Trees and matrices embedded in basedata objects can be added to the project.  (Issue #71)
    *  Labels in a basedata object can be deleted using the nodes/elements in the selected tree or matrix.  The converse can also be done, where those !BaseData labels not in the matrix or tree are deleted.  (issue #74).
  *  Calculations and indices:
    *  The count calculations have each been seperated into one calculation for the lists and one for the summary stats.  This applies to the local ranges, local sample counts and element lists.
    *  Metadata for the indices now includes formulae.  These are displayed in the online help, but are not displayed in the GUI.  http://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/wiki/Indices
    *  Added new index, NEST_RESULTANT (nestedness-resultant, [Indices#Nestedness-resultant]) from Baselga (2010) Glob Ecol Biogeog.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1466-8238.2009.00490.x (issue #92)
    *  Added binary and sample weighted taxonomic distinctness and variation from Clarke & Warwick (2001) Mar Ecol Progr Ser. http://dx.doi.org/10.3354/meps216265 (note that these are beta level implemenations and need user testing) (issue #102)
    *  The Endemism and Rarity calculations are now listed under their own headings.
    *  Added new list calculations to enable hierarchical partitioning of the endemism results (the ENDC`_`HPART`_` and ENDW`_`HPART`_` lists).  (Issue #99)
    *  The Bray-Curtis calculation ([Indices#Bray-Curtis_non-metric]) now also returns the A, B and W values used in the calculations. (Issue #124)
    *  Added new calculation for Bray-Curtis values normalised by the neighbourhood group counts ([Indices#Bray-Curtis_non-metric,_group_count_normalised]).  Resultant indices are the BRAY_CURTIS_NORM and associated A, B and W values. (Issue #126)
  *  Spatial Conditions
    *  New condition `sp_match_regex` which allows the user to match using arbitrary regular expressions.  For example, to match any group where the neighbour's third axis starts with the processing group's third axis, use `sp_match_regex (re => qr/^$coord[2]/, axis => 2, type => 'nbr')`.  (Issue #101)
  *  Randomisations
    *  The randomisations now compare against all lists, not just those in SPATIAL_RESULTS.  One consequence of this is that the resulting list names have changed.  To enable users to keep track of the results across multiple lists, the results are now named using the randomisation name, followed by `>>`, followed by the original list name.  For example, for a randomisation called `Rand1`, one could have resulting lists called `Rand1>>SPATIAL_RESULTS` and `Rand1>>ENDC_WTLIST`.  The naming scheme for the list contents has not changed (see [AnalysisTypes#Randomisations]).  The code is not backwards compatible, so previously run randomisations cannot be extended cleanly using this method.  This is because the SPATIAL_RESULTS comparisons will be divided across two lists in an output, e.g. `Rand1` and `Rand1>>SPATIAL_RESULTS`.  Re-running the randomisation from scratch is recommended.  Alternately, one can manually sum the `C_` and `Q_` values across the two result sets and from them calculate the updated `P_` values. (Issue 100)
    *  The swapping algorithm has been rewritten so it converges more efficiently  for large data sets.  (Swapping is used to reach richness targets in the rand_structured randomisation).  A consequence of this is that structured randomisations will not produce the same result between versions 0.13 and 0.14 if the seed value is specified.  This is because the random values are used in a different order and so will produce different results if given the same sequence of random values. As with the previous change, the simple solution to this is to start any randomisations afresh after upgrading rather than continuing any existing randomisations.  Continuing randomisations created in !BaseData objects prior to version 0.14 will result in mixed algorithms, thus making reproduction of results difficult.  (Issue #103)
    *  The comparison algorithm used when comparing spatial analyses now uses recycled results, resulting in a smaller memory footprint.  Recycling occurs when results are the same across the neighbourhood, as occurs with block and zone type spatial conditions.  In these cases one can generate one set of results and apply them across the neighbourhood rather than having multiple sets of identical results.  (Issue #107)
  *  Under the bonnet
    *  Several optimisations have been added where the system can use recycled results (those where the results are the same for all groups in a neighbourhood).


To see the full list of changes, see http://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/issues/list?can=1&q=label%3AMilestone-Release0.14

= Version 0.13 =

01Feb2010.  

Main changes since the previous version (0.12) are:

  *  Analyses, Calculations and Indices.
    *  The use of the term "analyses" in the documentation is now clearer.  Analyses can be one of Cluster, Spatial or Randomisation.  The term "calculation" is now used to describe the collection of indices that are calculated together, e.g. for the groups under a cluster node or within a spatial neighbourhood.  An analysis can apply several calculations to generate some number of indices.
    *  The endemism calculations have been subdivided.  The list indices are now in their own calculations, and need to be called explicitly if needed.
    *  Two new rarity calculations have been added to generate the lists of weights and sample counts for each label used, as per the endemism calculations.
  *  View labels tab:
    *  The view labels lists now have additional columns to allow sorting based on the selections (i.e. to promote the selected set to the top of the list).  Note that the list order changes dynamically according to the sort options.  This means that the list will be reordered if the label selection is changed and there is a sort in place using one or both of these columns.
    *  The second view labels list is only shown if there is a selected matrix.  This is because it is used to show the matrix column selection and control their sort order.
    *  The map legend is now shown in the view labels map pane.  This allows easier interpretation of the mapped values.
  *  Trees
    *  Nexus file import is now more flexible in the characters it accepts in names (anything that has no special meaning in nexus files), and also numeric formats used for lengths.
    *  Newick files are now supported for import (see issue #79).
    *  When displaying the cluster dendrogram, the user can choose not to use the slider bar to select nodes to plot on the map (access via the dendrogram Options menu).
  *  Group coordinates can be specified as Degree, Minutes, Seconds within a single column.  (Note: this is currently a beta level implementation).  See issue #61.
  *  The system now warns if the user attempts to create a new output, or rename an existing output, using a name that is already in use for that output type (see issue #62).
  *  The randomisation list results are now accessible (see issue #45).
  *  See also http://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/issues/list?can=1&q=label%3AMilestone-Release0.13

  *  For the list of current issues, or to submit a bug report or enhancement request then please see http://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/issues/list

= Version 0.12 =

07Dec2009

Main changes since the previous version (0.11) are:

  *  The Windows version comes bundled with updated GTK libraries, and the executable version does not require any additional downloads.  (We are still working on an easy Mac install).
  *  The export interface has been revamped to use two windows.  The first allows the selection of the output format and the second has parameters specific to that format.  This makes the parameter choices clearer as irrelevant parameters are not displayed.  
  *  Feedback to GUI does not contain the line numbers for the code.  They are still printed to the log window, though.
  *  Allow native format !BaseData, matrix and tree files to be loaded on startup (previous versions only allowed a project file to be loaded as an argument on startup).
  *  User is warned if they try to add a new spatial or cluster output to a !BaseData and it has one or more randomisations.
  *  Randomisation outputs can now be deleted.
  *  Randomisation outputs now have export methods to generate text files of their initial and current pseudo-random number generator (PRNG) state.
  *  The MXO_WARD and TXO_WARD metrics have been removed.  Use the new [http://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/wiki/Indices#Compare_dissimilarity_matrix_values "Compare dissimilarity matrix values"] analysis instead.
  *  Matrix elements (labels) can be remapped on import, as well as excluded/included using the properties table.
  *  The scree plot below the dendrogram is minimised to begin with.  It can be pulled up when needed.

  *  See also http://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/issues/list?can=1&q=label%3AMilestone-Release0.12


= Version 0.11 =

06Nov2009

Main changes since previous version (0.10).  This is a cleanup and bug fix release with no new features.

  *  Improved feedback and error trapping when running analyses.  If the system fails then a popup window will tell you what went wrong and where.  This information is still printed to the log window so you can access it after closing the popup.
  *  The error trapping also corrects issues where users are unable to close a tab if an analysis fails.  
  *  Basedata imports fail with a warning when they reach a record with an undefined or non-numeric value to be used for the groups (unless it is a text group).  The user can set an option to skip these records (this is on by default).
  *  System warns user when trying to export a randomisation output.  These cannot currently be exported (although the PRNG state would be useful).  The results can be exported from the relevant spatial or cluster output.  See [KeyConcepts#Randomisations]
  *  Exports for spatial outputs, groups and labels now have an option to specify the type of file instead of relying on the file extension for this.  This does not change the possibilities, but does make them clearer.



= Version 0.10 =

21Oct2009

Main changes since previous version (0.9.1185)

  *  Phylogenetic endemism indices are now in the main distribution.  For the theory and some examples, see [http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-294X.2009.04311.x Rosauer, Laffan et al. (2009) Molecular Ecology]
  *  Basedata objects now import from matrix format files, eg site by species matrices.  These are a common data format for specimen data.
  *  Documentation is moving to the Google Code wiki site.  http://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/w/list
  *  Renaming of basedata and outputs is now possible in the GUI
  *  Users can now specify a definition query to control the groups used in an analysis.  This uses the same syntax as the spatial neighbourhoods.  See http://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/wiki/KeyConcepts#Definition_Queries
  *  Option to show/hide the spatial neighbour and definition query edit boxes in the spatial and cluster tabs.  This frees up screen real estate but does not disable them.
  *  Spatial parameters:
    * sp_circle now has an axes argument to control the axes used (default is still to use all axes)
    * New subroutine `sp_match_text (text => 'blah', axis => 0, type => 'proc')`
    * New subroutine `sp_annulus (inner_radius => 100000, outer_radius => 300000)`
    * See http://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/wiki/SpatialConditions for examples.
  *  The Biodiverse icon is now used in all versions (previously was only the exe version)
  *  The version numbering system now excludes the SVN revision number.
  *  Numerous bug fixes - see http://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/issues/list?can=1&q=label%3A%27release0.10%27
  *  Some minor speed-ups and smaller memory footprint in some cases

  *  For the full issues list and to report a bug or request an enhancement, visit http://code.google.com/p/biodiverse/issues/list



= Version 0.9.1185 =

Main changes since previous release (version 0.9.1127)

  * Installation instructions updated, particularly for the Mac installs.
  * Fixed bug in tree reading module.  Now correctly reads nexus format files, including those exported from Biodiverse.
  * Documentation updated. 
  * Example files added to distribution (data folder)
  * !BaseData import now handles text with embedded newlines (these occur occasionally in plant and other data bases, usually in the collection descriptions).
  * Statistics::Descriptive2 now included in the distribution (under the lib folder)
  * Fixed issue where saved project file is given the name "1.bps"